year 2000, in the Rudder Tower, have the honor of interviewing Dr. Ray Bowen, president of A&M, about his student years.
Dr. Bowen, now a sentence, and then we'll... That is, if I can remember about my student years.
To begin with, describe your background of growing up, family, high school, before.
I'm the youngest of three.
I have two older brothers, both of whom went to A&M.
Born in Fort Worth, Texas, 1936.
Went to public schools in Fort Worth until my dad moved me to Dallas when I was a senior in high school.
Went a semester in North Dallas, then came to A&M from
From Dallas.
So you finished North Dallas High School?
Technically my diploma was from Paschal High School in Fort Worth, but I actually physically was at North Dallas High School in Dallas.
Still have some friends that were from there.
So I came to A&M, I had North Dallas friends and Paschal friends.
Now, why did you come to A&M?
Why here instead of some other place?
I was never asked, actually.
My older brother had already graduated.
He's class of 48, and my second brother was about to start his senior year, and it frankly was not a topic for negotiation.
My father, a reasonably successful businessman, actually a very successful businessman, but he didn't get out of high school, and when...
The story we believe around the family is that when he was playing poker one night with some friends and trying to make the decision about where my older brother would go to college, somebody told him about A&M, all male and make you study, keep you out of trouble, and so forth.
And he apparently decided with that kind of frivolous advice.
So when I came along eight years later, it was not... You said business.
What was his profession?
He was a wholesale food broker.
And he had a business in Fort Worth, and he grew it into Dallas and ended up running the Dallas operation for the last many years of his life.
Now, these older brothers majored in?
My older brother, Herbert, majored in electrical engineering.
My brother, Jerry, majored in petroleum engineering and mechanical engineering.
And your older brother is the one I met with Southwestern Bell.
Yes, that's right.
He's retired from Southwestern Bell.
So when do you remember first coming to A&M to visit?
Well, I think when he was a student.
He enrolled here.
He's class of 48, so he enrolled in 44.
He went a year, got married, went in the Navy, and came back.
So it was probably 47 or 48 when I was with him and his wife, who's his current wife, at a football game.
And what was it that caught your positive attention about A&M?
Quite frankly, the family pressure was so great that it wasn't really an issue of what I saw as positive or negative.
I think I was rather informed about what went on here.
And it was my perception that it was a good engineering program, and it seemed like in my family everybody was an engineer.
So engineering was your goal when you arrived?
That's correct.
Mechanical engineering was my goal.
There wasn't a fish camp there, was there?
No, there was a fish week, though.
If you're in the Corps, all the freshmen came a week earlier, something like FOW week now, and that you're free of sophomores, and you had some juniors, but mostly seniors, and it was an orientation week.
And describe as much as you can what went on.
Well, it was mainly a military orientation.
There was some university testing, placement kind of testing, so the university had some relationship there, but by my recollection, most of it was really how to get your uniform, how to put it on, how to march, and how to sort of whip out, understand what a fish is and what your privileges are so that when the sophomores came, you weren't totally destroyed.
I'll never forget when I
there's a privilege.
You couldn't come into the end of the buildings.
The freshman had to come into the front doors.
You couldn't walk in the direct route at the end.
An individual who turned out to be my squadron commander sort of met me at the side door, and I came in very friendly, welcomed me greatly, and then explained he'd better never catch me coming in that door again.
What, as far as you can recall, what did you bring physically with you?
What kind of clothing, if any, gear and so forth?
Well, everything had to be in a footlocker.
And, you know, books and things like that you bought here, and you didn't have a uniform, but basically what you could get in a footlocker plus what the uniform they gave you that you could then hang in your closet.
And that footlocker you bought?
Yes.
Or was it an older brother's?
Actually, mine was bought.
Mine was bought.
And were you assigned during that week to an outfit?
That's correct.
When we came here, we were in an outfit.
I think we made choices of Army versus Air Force, but then past that point, you just took what you were given.
And you chose?
Air Force.
Why?
I wanted to fly an airplane, I mean, for a very superficial reason, too.
And so what outfit?
I started out in what was called Squadron 21.
By the middle of my year, I switched to Squadron 10.
I had some friends there and stayed in Squadron 10 while I went on course staff.
Did it have a nickname?
Not in those days.
They didn't really use nicknames the way they use them now.
Which dorm?
Well, Squadron 21 was in 12, and then Squadron 10 was in 6.
No.
And the Corps was then scattered in the, quote, new dorms as well as... Yeah, all 12 of the new dorms plus the old area.
There was essentially an equal number of people over there.
Who were some of the personalities you met that first week that you...
Well, Harry Espy was the squadron commander, and Bob Sears was the first sergeant in Squadron 21, and they're the two people that kind of jump out at me.
And they're two people I've met since I've been back here.
I've gone to their class reunions, and they've been there, and it's been a real treat.
When did the activities begin that today a critic would call hazing?
When did that begin?
I think that Sunday night when we showed up.
When you showed up.
Yeah, but in a different tone.
It was more in a way of preparation for when the sophomores came.
But that Saturday, the coming Saturday, we always had a football game.
And then the sophomores showed up that Friday night, and the football game was really the first, what I would call, tough experience.
And this was mid-September.
Yeah, mid-September.
In those days, things started a little bit later in the semester, went past Christmas.
So you arrived the previous?
You'd drive on a Sunday.
Monday through Friday, you'd have your fish week.
The sophomores would begin to show up Friday night, is my recollection.
And, of course, the game would be Saturday.
It would be a yell practice Friday night.
And things would change radically at that point.
Describe that first yell practice as much as you remember.
Well, it was stressful, I think, because the sophomores were releasing their emotion of having been freshmen the year before.
And they didn't give you any peace and quiet.
Going there was terrible.
Coming back was terrible.
And the freshmen eventually learned to stick together and learn how to, in effect, haze the upperclassmen.
But at that point, you don't know this.
You see yourself as pretty much alone.
Yale practice was held that year where?
In the Grove.
And the people who attended were students plus whom else?
It was primarily students.
That's really all I'm conscious of.
So no girlfriends to speak of?
Well, the upperclassmen did.
They were more sophisticated about that.
They had some plans, but the freshmen didn't.
And then the next day, then a game.
Do you remember anything about that game?
No, of course, you stand up, and we knew we had to do that.
I don't even know who we played.
It was, I believe, the first game that Bear Bryant played as coach.
We played with Bryant as our coach.
And everybody was excited about the new coach and all of that kind of stuff.
But if you recall that year, it was a terrible year because he couldn't play as freshmen, and all his great athletes were freshmen.
Then you had registered during that week.
Yes, we had registered during that week.
Remember how many hours you took?
Eighteen, I think, something like that.
And as you arrived, what did you and your parents assume would be the number of years you would spend on your undergraduate degree?
Only four.
I mean, you just wouldn't contemplate anything different.
And the peer pressure was great.
You would contemplate flunking a class so you might have to stay longer, which is just the worst possible thing to happen.
And occasionally you'd meet people in five-year programs, like petroleum geological engineering was a five-year program, and architecture is a five-year program.
And you just couldn't imagine how strange that appeared to people.
You mean you'll stay in college an extra year?
Your major was mechanical?
Mechanical.
From day one?
From day one.
How did you select courses for that first semester?
Oh, they just told me.
In the catalog, you can look at it now, and you'll see essentially every course is prescribed.
The only question was what time of day you take the class.
I think there were electives in junior, maybe senior year, one elective or something.
It was very prescribed.
Did you all go through the SEBISA registration system?
Yes, yes.
Stand in line.
Of course, I think that at Fish Week, it was expedited in some way, but the typical routine was stand in line and take your best shot.
What are some memories of that first semester academically?
I was not what was perceived to be a good student.
In fact, my older brothers, they kind of smile when I speculate about this now, but I think they were making bets that I wouldn't make it.
And I really had to learn to study.
I didn't know how to study.
And in those days, there were mid-semester grades, and I did terrible, just absolutely terrible.
My biggest recollection was that nobody cared.
It was my problem.
It wasn't their problem.
The upperclassmen didn't care.
If you flunk out, that's your problem.
It just sort of dawned on me that if I was going to stay here, I had to do it on my own.
And I sort of grew up, and I think boys do that.
I think boys sort of wake up one day, and they're different than they were the day before.
And that hit me in the middle of my freshman first semester.
Was there any person that helped to reassure you?
Not really.
My brother, Jerry, was always good, but he was a senior, very preoccupied, and he wasn't sort of, he didn't ridicule my efforts, and he was always supportive, but he wasn't sort of a mentor or anything like that.
So you decided on your own?
Yeah, that's my recollection.
The reality may be different, but my recollection and my bad stage is this is my problem.
So at the end of the first semester,
In the first semester, I did reasonably well.
You passed everything.
I passed everything.
I think I had an upper C average or something, which I was perfectly satisfied with.
And it progressively got better the longer I stayed.
You're a fish old lady.
Did you all use that terminology?
Yes.
Who was that?
Tell the truth, I think his name was Bishop.
He flunked out that first semester and I never saw him again.
I've been curious about finding him and going back to him.
I mentioned we changed outfits.
I changed with a friend.
I'd grown close to a guy I'd gone to high school with in Dallas named Joe Giffray, and he was in a different outfit.
So the two of us moved to Squadron 10 as roommates.
At the end of the first semester.
End of the first semester.
So he was really the fish old lady that I remember the most.
And I had a bad batting average.
He sort of flunked out of school fairly quick, too.
But he eventually came back and graduated.
Describe the furnishings of a freshman's room at that time.
What was in the room?
They were not elegant.
You've perhaps seen these things.
There was a bunk bed, metal with just a wire kind of spring with kind of a dirty, thin mattress on it, which, of course, you had to make up in a military style.
There was a desk for each of you, and there was a shelf for your books, and there was a closet on either side of the door as you came in to hang your clothes, and there was a basin where you could brush your teeth and get water and so forth.
And that was really it.
There was probably one or two plugs in the room.
I think if you were a sophomore, you could have a radio or something.
We used to relish the time we could have a radio.
No phones, TVs, computers, stereos.
No air conditioning, of course.
Describe a typical class day.
What time did you get up and what did you do at what hour?
Well, as a freshman, you had to get up about 6.30 in the morning to have breakfast early.
You were not allowed to miss that.
But you had to go to bed about 10.30 or so without special permission.
So your day was regimented quite a bit.
But the academic side of it, it was quite common six days a week to have an 8 o'clock class.
You might luck out and have a 9 o'clock a couple days.
And you'd probably go to class certainly all morning, and maybe one or two days a week you wouldn't have classes late in the afternoon.
But as you got older with labs and so forth, it wasn't unusual to have classes essentially all afternoon as well.
And did you have an upperclassman's room you were responsible for caring for?
I came in the liberal time.
Actually, I did not.
Class of 58 just didn't have to do that.
You know, I had little sort of harmless personal service, go to the laundry for me, do things like that.
But there was no sort of responsibility to clean up somebody else's room.
What about hazing after supper in the dormitory?
It occasionally occurred.
My freshman year, my second semester of my freshman year, in celebration of something, I think an intramural championship or something, some of the upperclassmen got prunes out and took them out after the freshman.
Somebody turned them in like they always do, it seems like, and there was a big controversy surrounding my outfit associated with that hazing.
We always saw it as unimportant and trivial, and we thought the university was quite unreasonable to worry about such things.
And paddles had pretty well vanished?
Occasionally, but not as a common thing.
You'd find someone that had a paddle in their room, but I was never hit with a paddle.
My experience was being on the bad end of a broom, and they'd hit you with the large end, not the stick.
And how many licks, maybe?
Not many, one or two.
Sometimes you trade licks.
And if you did something wrong and you got hit with a broom, theoretically it's possible for them to mess up, hit you low or high, and then you got to hit them.
And that was always a lot of fun.
But looking back on it, we never saw it as physical abuse.
It was a different time and a different context.
Occasionally we would trade licks.
and take great pride in how we could basically launch our buddies in some way.
In this second outfit you were in, that we'd be with for a while, were there some key leaders in that outfit?
Yeah, one of the Yale leaders that year was the squadron commander.
His name was Carpenter, Bob Carpenter, wonderful guy.
First sergeant was a guy named Alan Greer, but his leadership came in conflict with this hazing thing, and I think he never became a squadron commander, or he was in a short period of time.
A number of people I see now, one of the meanest sophomores I've ever encountered in my life was a guy named George Alexander.
He lives in San Angelo now.
George was a
Really tough, very demanding.
And one of the first people that called me after I got this job was this wonderful, kind, friendly person named George Alexander.
And I'm not sure it's the same guy.
Obviously it is.
But he's become a great friend over the years.
And there are just a lot of people.
Dewey McMullen is a retired faculty member here in construction science.
He was a sophomore in that first outfit.
that I've made friends with as I've come back here.
And he was always a kind guy.
LaVon Anderson is a former student that's active in the Chancellor's Century Council, was in that second outfit.
Huge number of people that largely in the second outfit I've gotten to know again as I've come back.
All right.
And one of your classmates, I believe, who has been very generous to the institution, when did you first meet him?
Well, you're talking about John Hagler.
John and I were selected to be on Corps staff at the same time, at the end of our sophomore year is when that selection was made.
And he ended up as my roommate, and we were roommates together for two years.
Did you know each other before that?
Not really, not really.
He was in the Army side of things, and he was in a field artillery.
And maybe his sophomore year, he was even in the other area.
I don't really remember that.
Probably so.
And I had not known him, but we became good friends.
He was an ag econ major.
So our paths just had not crossed.
He was a good student, and I was an evolving good student.
During that first year, describe what the routine was for fish in the chow hall.
Of course, you always had to sit at attention.
And your job was to serve, sort of be the transport system for food around the table and serve everybody else.
And there was an entire language for the, every kind of food had its own unique name and you had your own language to use.
It was a difficult period, you know, tightly structured.
If you messed up, you're in great trouble.
And the great benefit was when you had time to wait until all the upperclassmen had left and then you could get something to eat.
Did you all use all the slang?
Yes, yes.
Every item of food had its own name.
Did you ever get into trouble at home when you forgot and used some...
Bad name?
No, actually I didn't.
My mother was pretty tolerant of her sons.
Because I've heard of some Aggies who did.
I can imagine.
I can imagine some misunderstandings would come up.
All right.
Did you ever get in?
Can you share any assignments that somebody gave you as a fish at the chow hall?
Some tasks?
Well, there were always situations where a senior with a sense of humor would send you to another table to insult some other senior friend, knowing full well that when you did it, you would be abused terribly, verbally abused terribly.
There was always a lot of what they call good bull in that context.
One of the things that happened after you were around a while, you became sort of insulated against the kind of negatives of that.
It became a lot of fun.
You almost like the idea of playing the naive young freshman to go over and do something outrageous to some big-shot upperclassman and then act like you're a victim of that.
You didn't understand.
So you get caught up in it, and in effect, you haze the upperclassman.
Can you share with this machine some of the ludicrous task assignments you were given?
Not really.
That was too far ago.
I just can't do it.
Ever have assignments to go to Northgate to get something or Southgate?
Yeah, occasionally.
Not in an excessive way.
Go pick up someone's laundry, for example, is a more common kind of thing.
Occasionally you'd be asked to go buy something for someone at Northgate, but not really in a real interfering way.
Did anyone ever ask you to do something that was really far beyond good reason?
Probably so, but not probably I thought at the time, but nothing that has been retained over the years.
You'd occasionally have an upper class one that was extremely busy and asked you to do something that was clearly out of the rules or out of the protocols.
Typically one of his classmates would say, no, don't do that.
There was a kind of a self-correcting process there.
And in your era, all the veterans are pretty well gone.
The Korean veterans had come back.
My freshman year was full of Korean veterans.
That period of time at A&M was interesting.
The Corps was not required in my freshman year.
That's correct.
In fact, it was not required the four years I was an undergraduate.
There was a tremendous peer pressure to be in the Corps.
The enrollment was robust, but if you got out of the Corps, you didn't have to leave the university like you did in the old days.
But simultaneously, there were a lot of Korean veterans that came back to school.
So the typical class had cadets, of course, but it had a healthy dose of veterans and some non-reg students.
What effect did those real veterans have on the campus?
Well, not too much in terms of the Corps life.
You didn't see them.
Many of them were married and so forth.
But in the classroom, they had a dramatic effect.
They were just not the horsing around, you know, and the kinds of questions they were asked were very serious, very intense, and if we acted in a kind of frivolous, unconcerned way, they would either scowl at us and more than once tell us how stupid we were.
And they were a stabilizing influence, let's put it that way.
That's what I was assuming.
And College View was full.
College View was there.
It was full.
In fact, it had been there for years.
My older brother and his wife had lived in it when he came back from the Navy.
And the project houses were still... I don't remember much about the project houses.
I've learned more about them since I've been here.
I think if they were there, I just didn't pay attention to them.
The first Silver Taps, do you remember?
Barely, barely.
It was an unusual experience.
My recollection was I didn't really know what to expect.
I knew that if we said a word, going, coming, we turned the light on, it was like death.
You'd be kicked out of school.
I couldn't imagine how intense the pressure was not to say anything.
You're preconditioned, of course, to speak to everybody.
All of a sudden, people you were seeing and you knew that knew you, you couldn't speak.
It was an unusual event, but I don't remember the specifics about it.
During your student years, was it always taken seriously by all the students?
Absolutely.
No exception.
I would have been dumbfounded if there had been a different answer.
It was strong, really strong.
In fact, now Silver Taps is still an important event, but there are parts of the campus that there are lights on.
You'd never see that.
You'd never see a light in a remote building.
The campus would be absolutely black.
You know, there are timers on the house that Sally and I live in that the light on the garage would be on.
Well, that would never happen in the old days.
You would have been expected to shut it down completely.
And you came back to your room.
You didn't turn the light on and start studying.
You went to bed.
Did you go on court trips that first year?
Yeah.
Describe...
Well, I wish I could remember precisely where we went.
We went to Fort Worth or Dallas and Austin or Houston.
I don't remember, frankly, which of those places we went to.
Being from Dallas, I probably took advantage of that since my parents were there.
It was a great experience.
You typically bummed off a friend.
In my experience, you never stayed in a hotel or slept in your car.
You found a fish buddy or somebody to stay with.
You typically had a date.
Did you have wheels that freshman year?
Part of the year I did.
I'll tell you back my freshman year I did not.
My sophomore year I did.
So how did you get on the court?
Hitchhiked.
Like everybody else, you hitchhiked.
And it's kind of unfortunate that that's been lost over the years.
Our society now just wouldn't support something like that.
Yeah, I would hitchhike to Dallas on more than court trips.
If I just decided I had to go to Dallas, I'd go out, get on the highway, and hitchhike.
And where was the best place to catch the ride?
Well, basically somewhere around Northgate or over on Texas Avenue in front of now the Williamsville.
Did you ever have a negative experience?
Not one.
It was amazing.
Looking back on it, you would think you'd had something strange happen, but never one.
Any amusing experiences?
No, everybody was very nice.
I discovered some good restaurants between here and Dallas, some greasy spoons.
Everybody would typically want to stop and buy you something to eat or something, but no native experience.
Nobody ever offered you whiskey?
No.
Actually, no.
I led a dull life.
During that first year, how did you communicate with family?
Letters.
You'd write them.
There was like one phone.
There may have been one phone in the dorm.
If there wasn't, there was one in the dorm adjacent to it, a pay phone, but you never called.
And there weren't any emergencies, I hope, that occurred.
No, never.
And in terms of class attendance, how often did you go to class?
Well, in those days, you really went to class.
Everybody checked roll, and there was little tolerance of missing class.
In fact, if you missed
I had unexcused absences.
They just docu-grade somehow.
And the engineering, math, science kinds of things I was taking, there was no flexibility at all.
Who were some of those key instructors as you look back in the first year or two?
The first year or two, they really didn't take on much of an identity.
I had a math class from Professor Porter, I remember.
It was actually what we call analytic geometry.
And I learned later, I think he'd been the department head some years before.
He was a fine gentleman and a great teacher.
The faculty I remember and think back of were the ones that taught the major classes later.
There was someone you know, Cliff Semang, a giant of a man.
He was the, called him Big Steam.
He taught the thermal classes and stuff.
He passed away right after I came back here.
It had been years since I'd seen him.
Some of my professors are still around.
Ed Holdridge was my
One of my undergraduate teachers and my major professor left A&M right before I got my PhD and Ed took over my committee and signed my dissertation.
In those undergraduate days, what were some of Professor Semang's good traits?
I think rigidity was one of his biggest traits.
His classes were very structured.
It was sort of like, you could tell he had a military background.
Everybody had an assigned seat.
You had to homework every time.
Three or four problems you had to work to turn into the next class.
And you had to turn them in in a certain sequence so that when he sat down that night to grade them,
yours had better be alphabetically in the right place.
If it wasn't, he'd count off.
And everything in the class was so carefully done.
His lectures were precise.
There was never a question, no imprecision at all about the way he presented the material.
You tell he'd done it a few times.
A few years later, I heard myths from students about some of the math courses by Square Root Jackson and Cube Root Kent were those
I never had them as teachers.
I've heard about them.
What were the tough courses that a mechanical engineer had to get through?
Well, one of the courses that was kind of the separator was a course called statics.
You took it your sophomore year, and a lot of people failed it.
It was kind of the dividing class.
Of course, chemistry and physics were your freshman year, but if you got into the first engineering class, the statics was the one that you really confronted.
And if you got through it and the follow-on course, Dynamics, and you got through Thermo, you could probably make it.
Engineering was kind of downhill from that point.
And that would be third year.
Yeah, Dynamics was third year, and Thermo was third year.
As you recall your freshman class, about how many, maybe your outfit's the better measuring stick, about how many were back the second year?
About half.
About half?
Yeah.
As you were... And a lot of those left the first couple weeks.
About how many of them left would have...